So let's now dive into a concrete example and attached you find a basic project where I give you some
Javascript code I wrote and a dist folder with an index.html file and some styles and also two webpack
files and a package.json file. Download and extract this attached project and then in there,
open it in your editor, open the terminal there and first of all run npm install of course to install
all the dependencies
this project needs which are simply all these build tools like webpack. Thereafter, you can run npm
run build dev.
Now I told you to measure production performance and we will do so later
but just to see what we got
let's speed up that development server for now. So this will now open that development server and once
you visit this page, you will find this basic application here.
Now important,
visit this page in an incognito tab so that you have no other plugins or browser extensions interfere
with your code.
Now what you got here is in the end a basic site where you have a bunch of dummy products,
you can also add a new product here and it will be added at the top here as you can tell and you can
then also delete a product here and interact with your application like that.
So it's a very simple project here, a very simple web site,
of course all the interactions you saw here are driven with the help of Javascript here.
So here we have three script files which in the end make sure that what you see on the screen
works the way you see it.
Now let's see how we could approach optimizing this app here and of course it's also important to realize
that this is not a slow app,
it has no huge performance issues as you can tell, everything works quite smoothly here.
Now of course because I'm on a fast device here, I have a fast Internet connection but also in general
because even though I added some problems to the code here, it's not horrible code and it's also not
that large of an application
but issues like the ones I added here could add up in a bigger application and therefore fixing them
as we're going to do it throughout this module is a good idea.
Now let's first of all have a look at how we can analyze this application with the help of the browser
dev tools and there are a couple of things we can have a look at there.
Now again, keep in mind this is the development mode code
therefore it's not fast, it's not optimized but to walk you through the different tools we have it is
of course fine to use. Now one tool we can use to find out how often we interact with DOM and what we
affect in the DOM is the elements tab in the dev tools
and here I'm talking about the Chrome dev tools,
most browser dev tools have similar tabs or tools built in but Chrome has really great development
tools and
therefore I'll use it for this section, so the elements tab here's the first one.
Now let's reload this page and let's have a look at one example,
let's expand the unordered list here so that we can see all the list items here
and now watch the list items here on the right, not on the left but on the right when I click delete
on a carpet, watch it on the right, you see these items all were highlighted.
Now Chrome highlights the items here which actually were touched by it,
so which were changed or which were added or re-rendered
and of course this already gives us one hint at something which might not be perfect at the moment. When
I delete for example the last item here, the t shirt,
it's a bit unexpected that all the other items are changed as well, so maybe that is something we can
optimize.
Now we get other tabs which are interesting as well,
for example the network tab. Here we can find out how much code we're downloading, how long it takes and
how many round trips we have.
So if we reload this starting page, here we see we have a couple of requests.
Now the last two requests are only related to our development setup,
they will not be there in production mode,
the first three requests are always there because we have our HTML page,
we have some CSS code, we have some Javascript code.
Now this code is not optimized at all,
instead it has a bunch of development only code added to it and therefore you can tell these files are
quite large, especially the Javascript file,
it has the size of over 1mb which is really big,
so that will be smaller in production of course.
Now since I'm already using webpack here, what we don't have here is extra HTTP round trips.
I am using multiple files here and I do import them into each other
but since we have webpack here, they are actually bundled together, so webpack ensures here that we don't
have too many round trips, so we already have this optimization. The size again will not be bad in production
mode, in development mode of course it is an issue but we will also optimize this for production mode
because in the production mode webpack config, the mode is set to production and this will lead webpack
to shrink our code and optimize it even more as we will see in a second.
So here we have no huge issue but I still want to show you an issue we could have if this 1mb
code would be our final output,
it isn't here but imagine it would be because here in the dev tools, you can do a couple of interesting
things.
First of all, make sure you disabled cache here in the network tab so that the browser doesn't cache as
long as you have the dev tools open here and then here on this dropdown where you see online, you can
throttle your internet speed. Now for example here we could choose slow for g, to simulate our slower network
speed and if we do that, you will see this now reloads and it spins and spins here and now you see when
I click this button here, I get errors here.
This is not an interactive page,
we see something but I'm not able to do something,
I actually reloaded the page here because Javascript was missing, Javascript here prevents the default
but because Javascript is 1mb big and we're faking a slow connection, it takes too long to download
Javascript and therefore our application is actually even broken because this button isn't handled correctly.
So here we already have an example of why a too-large script file could be a problem.
Now again, here it actually isn't too big, this is just a development mode
but if that would be your production ready output, you would want to do everything you can to shrink
it.
So here, I'll disable throttling,
I just wanted to highlight what the problem can be here.
So let's move on,
what else do we have?
Well we have the performance tab which sounds important if we talk about performance and there you can
also do this throttling,
you can also do CPU throttling here to simulate a slower CPU, for example if I set to six times
slow down, by the way you can open this menu by clicking the gear icon here in case you don't have it
yet,
if I set this to six times slow down, we could check whether our app now is a bit slower.
Now this page here actually still is pretty fast because it doesn't have that complex of a script
on it but if you had a page with a lot of complex animations running or a lot of complex interactions,
then you could use CPU slow down here to check whether it might have issues on slower devices.
The memory tab allows you to do more things than just throttling though, you can record performance here
and then analyze it in detail.
So for example here I'll turn on throttling, now click that record button, click on the delete on any
item and click on the record button again or click on stop down there.
Now what you'll get is such a profile here and you'll see, there is a lot on the screen,
so what do we have here?
Now for one here you see screenshots of the app over time so you see how it changed,
you see that here because I have this screenshot checkmark here,
you could of course remove that to not take screenshots. You can also show a memory timeline so
that you can see memory consumption,
this can be helpful for analyzing memory leaks but for the moment we don't need it
and then you have all this part here,
what is this all about?
Well this is the timeline of the snapshot you captured in the end here.
Now here, you see the work that was done and at the bottom if you increase this here, you see a breakdown
of the overall work and you'll see for the entire snapshot I took, most of the time it was not doing
anything, which is good because that means it is able to capture user input.
You see that around 100 milliseconds were taken for scripts to run and then we had some rendering on
the page going on, some painting which is in the end related to rendering,
so these steps together are basically which bring something onto the screen and some system work which
also was done,
now of course the exact numbers will be different for you.
Now we see here in the timeline when which tasks were executed, for example back here we have nothing
going on, nothing is going on here. You can simply press and hold to drag here and select a part of
that screen which is then zoomed in here at the bottom,
for now I'll not zoom in but just increasing this again. Now we see some work is going on here,
right,
so maybe we zoom in this part by simply holding and dragging and leave and go
and now we zoom in here in this detail analysis at the bottom. Now what we see down there are a couple
of things,
we see the frames per second
we have here, we see user interactions, for example here that we had a mouse up event because we clicked
on a button and we have the main thread
and you learned that Javascript runs on a single thread,
well that is that thread on which it ran
and there you see that Javascript ran because we had a click event to which we listened
and we also see that here already, we have a problem.
This is marked in red by the dev tools here for me because the handler took 92.26
milliseconds which is quite long.
We then see that because of the click, a function call was triggered
and if you click on it, you even see in which file this function sits and which function it was
so you can find out which function executed there.
Now you can then have a look at this by scrolling down here on the y-axis to see the call stack. You
see that the delete product function was called, you see that it took 6.4 milliseconds,
by the way you always have total time and self time, total time simply is the amount of work this function
took and all the other functions that were called inside of the functions took and self time is the
time this function took without the work of the included functions, generally it's the total time that
matters to you.
So we have delete product, this in turn called render products which court which took 6.4
milliseconds and then here we zoom in even more with the mouse wheel, we see that an anonymous
function was executed there, append child was used.
We see that we seem to reach out to HTML here, the small blue bars here,
that's when we reached out to HTML,
we parsed our HTML code, so we probably interacted with the DOM here in the script and so on.
So you can really dive into that and see how long operations took and how long a problematic operation
overall took.
Now of course you should always keep an eye on the overall operation because here we have 100 milliseconds
which is not great but of course which is still relatively quick.
Nonetheless, this might be one thing we might be able to improve, though you should keep in mind that
we're still in development mode,
so this is not really what the users will have in the end, so I'll turn off throttling and now move on.
This is the performance tab
and I'll give you further resources to explore everything you can do here in the lecture after this one.
First of all let's move on to other tabs though and there for example we have the memory tab. The memory
tab allows you to take memory snapshots and here the heap snapshot is the most interesting one. You can
take a snapshot by clicking on take snapshot at the bottom here or on this take snapshot button here.
Now if you take a snapshot, you get such a memory snapshot which looks very complex,
in the end this gives you everything, shows you everything which is stored in memory because of your
web application
and there are a lot of things in there
the browser manages automatically no matter what you do in your scripts.
Now diving into this snapshot here is really hard,
more interesting is to see comparisons between snapshots.
For example here I took a snapshot,
now I will delete an item and take another snapshot
and now if we go to the second snapshot, here on the summary dropdown, we can use comparison
and this gives us the difference between this snapshot and this snapshot
and if we have a look at the comparison here for the second snapshot, we now see which items were added
to memory and which items were removed and for example here we see that what was removed was a button
element, a heading so a h2 or a h1 element, a list item element and a paragraph element and
these are all the elements which are part of such a render product.
You see the delta here compared to the previous snapshot is -1 which means in the end effectively
one element was removed and this is good.
If this would not be the case after deleting a product here, we would probably have a memory leak because
that would mean that we still have the item lingering around in memory somewhere and I'll come back to
memory leaks later,
I just want to show this tab right now,
it will become more important later once we analyze our app for memory leaks. And last but not least,
you have this audits tab here. There for example you can run a performance audit, you can tick different
boxes here,
at the moment we're just interested in performance and then the browser, Chrome, will do a couple of checks
for you and find out how your app behaves,
for example here we can run the performance audit, still in development mode
so not optimal and you see in development mode, we have a pretty poor performance.
We have a slow loading time,
first content full paint is in the end an indicator for when our app is putting something onto the screen,
when it is interactive and so on.
You see the different screenshots for the timeline and you get some opportunities here, for example that
our scripts are too big.
So this can be nice to get a general idea of which problems your page might have and thereafter you could
dive into the more specialized tabs to find out what exactly the problem is and what you can do here.
So now after this general round trip here,
let me point you at some other resources before we then test this under production circumstances and have
a look at some potential improvements.